is this an out of season April Fool's
joke mobile gaming it's a bit of a
contentious topic these days due to the
proliferation of microtransactions and
pay2win titles but ten years ago mobile
was seen as this exciting new frontier
or a Wild Wild West for indie game
developers the low barrier to entry with
mobile resulted in app stores being
flooded with games of varying quality
which typically fell within the range of
unplayable to mediocre but every now and
then a genuinely compelling game would
bubble up go viral and make some loan
developer who coded it in his mom's
basement rich in the process today's
story finds its basis in that exact
premise but rather than a developer's
game blowing up being a dream come true
for him it turned out to be a bit of a
living nightmare for him today I'm going
to be talking about the media frenzy
that surrounded flappy bird and its
creator Dong Nguyen flappy bird released
in 2013 was a mobile game that took the
world by storm with its simplistic
design and addictive gameplay many of
you likely remember this game and
perhaps you even downloaded it and
played it at one point but what you
probably weren't aware of is the deep
and confusing rabbit hole that exists in
relation to it and its developer flappy
bird was mysteriously pulled from the
App Store in February of 2014 when it
was reportedly making $50,000 a day
leaving many people invested in this
situation and this game wondering what
exactly happened to the game in its
creator well today guys I'm breaking it
all down for you this is the story of
flappy bird and its enigmatic creator
Dong Nguyen real quick before we get
started I want to thank the ridge for
sponsoring today's video they make these
sleek metallic wallets that go in your
front pocket on the ridge website you'll
find the wallets come in various
materials from aluminum to titanium to
carbon fiber so there's plenty to choose
from and there's a plethora of colors to
pick from as well I've got a 10% off
link in the description box I want you
guys to take advantage of that's Ridge
comm slash surf and use code surf on
their website to save 10% off your order
and that includes free worldwide
shipping so make sure you guys check the
rig out and major thanks to them for
supporting the channel anyways let's get
onto the story the story of flappy bird
and Dong Nguyen finds its roots in early
2013 when at the time was a 28 year old
indie game developer living with his
parents in Hanoi Vietnam when it founded
his game development company dot gears
all the way back in 2005 when he was 20
years old and he himself had created
multiple titles for various platforms
through the company though none of his
early work was successful his games were
heavily inspired by many of the
punishing 8-bit side-scrollers that were
popular in the NES era games that were
quick to pick up but required multiple
deaths and ria temps to master and
complete objectives this style of
gameplay had fallen out of vogue in the
late 90s and 2000's as many franchises
switched over to a more 3d exploration
based game design but in the early
2010's punishing 2d side scrollers in
retro gaming in general came back into
style in a big way and many indie
developers would find success revisiting
this format and amidst this boom of 2d
gaming mobile gaming was experiencing
its first true gold rush dong win
feeling as if mobile made sense as a
platform for these easy to pick up hard
to master side-scrolling games took a
crack at making some compelling 2d
titles for the new burgeoning platform
and little did he know that one of these
mobile games he created would become a
worldwide phenomenon sometime in the
spring of 2013 Dong Nguyen created a
game for the iPhone which he called
flappy bird making use of a bird
character he named fabious scrapped
project when developed the game in just
three days the game's concept was
remarkably simple the player takes
control of a bee as he Scrolls across a
linear path the player is then required
to navigate baby through an endless
gauntlet of obstacles which is done by
tapping the screen to boost his altitude
and ceasing tabs to allow him to descend
and as far as gameplay goes that's about
as complex as the game gets pretty much
you try to make it through as many
obstacles as possible before you crash
and have to restart now gameplay aside
there were
some overtly derivative visual design
choices that dongwan used in developing
flappy birds such as this blatant
copy/paste job of Super Mario warp pipes
being used as the obstacles other more
subtle 2d Mario influence can be found
including the color palette which is
pretty much a direct copy of many of the
grassland levels found throughout Mario
games this juxtaposition between the
Super Mario assets and dong wins assets
surf to create a bootleg feel for this
game but overall the visual aesthetic
wasn't too distracting so flappy bird
would be published to the iOS App Store
in May of 2013 the game was free to
download and the only form of
monetization came in in-game
advertisements after it being released
though it received virtually no
downloads for the remainder of 2013 it
seemed that the game was a complete flop
but as the new year came around in early
2014 something very curious began to
happen in late January the amount of
downloads for flappy bird suddenly began
to skyrocket seemingly out of nowhere
thousands of people began downloading
this game and it quickly spread by word
of mouth as many mobile games typically
do flappy bird became a viral sensation
of sorts and has spread would
exponentially increase his popular
internet celebrities like PewDiePie
would make videos talking about the
quirky game by the time February had
come around it was topping the iOS App
Store charts in over 100 countries and
game critics could not have been more
confounded in regards to the game
success critics were painting flappy
bird across the board for what they said
was rudimentary game design and blatant
super mario asset ripping its designs
appear to have been taken almost
directly out of previously existing
titles an ultimately flappy bird was a
shallow flash-in-the-pan smartphone
anomaly that were not going to miss a
certain addictive or compulsive quality
isn't sufficient to make a genuinely
good game sadly flappy bird is addictive
and compulsive in the same way that
popping bubble wrap is addictive and
compulsive it may be immediately
satisfying to waste your time with the
short term but when you look back on how
your
you'll find yourself wishing you'd use
those hours for something more
productive or stimulating there were
legitimate grounds to criticize flappy
bird for its simplistic and derivative
design but critics at least were willing
to admit this game was hella addictive
the surmised addictive nature of flappy
bird coupled with its rampant spread and
popularity
served to create a boogeyman reputation
for the game within the media leading to
an almost Momo like fear mongering
campaign which suggested the game may be
dangerous for its players flappy bird
was being portrayed in the media as this
game that was so addictive that if you
picked it up just once you would quit
your job divorce your wife you know dump
all of your life responsibilities just
to play this game while this absolutely
wasn't the case the game would become
even more controversial thanks to a
barrage of misinformation from the media
on February 1st several media outlets
were sharing a story which claimed that
a 16 year old boy from Chicago had
stabbed his brother 17 times in the
chest killing him in a flappy bird
related altercation the story goes that
the older brother was teasing his
younger brother after the younger
brother couldn't beat his new flappy
bird high-score an argument would break
out and the older brother was killed in
a blind rage this story was shared
across multiple online news sites and
further fueled the flappy bird panic it
turns out though that this story was a
complete fabrication and was eventually
discovered to have been a hoax published
by an onion like satirical news website
called hustlers dot-com I'm not gonna
lie what I came across the article for
the first time I took a look at it and I
was like yeah I could see this actually
happening so I think by now you have a
pretty good understanding of the
frenzied climate that surrounded flappy
bird spread now our story takes a turn
inward as we look at the mysterious
personal life of Dong Nguyen around the
time of flappy bird spread the success
of his flappy bird game naturally made
him a target for the press who sought to
question him about flappy bird and is
the
development many would try to get a
correspondence with when none would
succeed the man remained elusive only
infrequently addressing the public via
his Twitter account though taking a look
at his Twitter post from this time
reveals that the massive success of
flappy bird in the media attention that
came with it was beginning to wear on
Dong Nguyen Congrats on the amazing
success of flappy bird we'd love to send
a few questions over if you had time to
answer I'm really sorry I am overloaded
now one man cannot handle all of these
press people are overrating the success
of my games it's something I never want
please give me peace and also I'm sorry
press people you are not my players to
give further context of these tweets in
early February the verve had published
an article in which they calculated that
wind had been making upwards of 50,000
dollars a day in ad revenue from flappy
bird this jaw-dropping amount of income
from a simple mobile game would incur
the ire from critics and journalists
alike the growing sentiment was that win
had made himself a rich man off what
they considered stealing and Nintendo's
intellectual property of course
referring to the super mario like assets
in flappy bird you know suggesting that
nintendo could sue in a vision to this
win was also being accused of bahding
downloads and reviews on flappy bird in
its early rise in January of 2014 while
this is all speculation and has never
been proven the sudden spike in
popularity of the game was definitely
suspicious hundreds of articles were
written about when in a matter of days
and eventually this proved to be too
much for him to take On February 8th of
2014 as the popularity of flappy bird
was at a fever pitch dong win would take
to Twitter and tweet out a series of
brief statements that shocked everyone
I can call flappy bird as a success of
mine but it also ruins my simple life so
now I hate it I'm sorry flappy bird
users twenty two hours from now i will
take flappy bird down i cannot take this
anymore it is not anything related to
legal issues i just cannot keep it
anymore after tweeting this out wind
fell completely silent across all social
media and flappy bird was indeed pulled
from the app store as promised a day
later the media was completely baffled
by dog winds decision to pull the app
when it was making him so much money and
the rumor mill quickly began to churn as
to the circumstances of why he pulled it
the prevailing theory was that when
wasn't being truthful about legal issues
and he had actually received some sort
of DMCA takedown notice from nintendo
and if you ask somebody today why flappy
bird was removed from the App Store this
is likely the explanation that they
would tell you but this has actually
been proven not to be the case at least
according to official statements from
Nintendo given to the Guardian On
February 11th in response to the
question of was Nintendo taking legal
action against twin Nintendo spokesman
yasujiro mini gawa stated while we
usually do not comment on the rumors and
speculations we have already denied the
speculation so with the Nintendo lawsuit
theory out of the window everyone was
really left scratching their heads
wondering what the hell happened despite
all the questions though when still
remain silent about the issue and left
those hoping for an explanation in the
dark his silence on this issue even led
some theorizing that he had committed
suicide in the wake of the media
harassment and games removal but this
wasn't the case eventually after some
time had passed and he had done some
personal self-reflection dongwan would
finally decide to reemerge from the
shadows in the form of an interview with
Forbes in this interview he describes
his rationale for removing flappy bird
from the App Store flappy bird was
designed to play in a few minutes when
you are relaxed but it happened to
become an addictive product I think it
has become a problem to solve that
problem it's best to take down flappy
bird it's gone forever so essentially he
claims he did it for altruistic reasons
but in a face-to-face interview that he
would do with David Kushner from Rolling
Stone he tells a bit of a different
story and makes it clear that the
overwhelming attention from the media
was a major contributing factor
News hit of how much money Winn was
making his face appeared in the
Vietnamese paper and on TV which was how
his mom and dad first learned their son
had made the game the local paparazzi
soon besieged his parents house and he
couldn't go out unnoticed while this
might seem a small price to pay for such
fame and fortune for when the attention
felt suffocating he couldn't sleep
couldn't focus didn't want to go
outdoors his parents he says were
worried about my well-being when I asked
him why he did it he answers with the
same conviction that led him to create
the game I'm master of my own fate
he says independent thinker since taking
flappy bird down
he says he's felt relief I can't go back
to my life before but I'm good now
so despite all the rumors and theories
floating around that tried to explain
why he pulled it it turns out in reality
that it was really the simplest
explanation when couldn't handle all the
attention I think many of you watching
and even myself to an extent feel that
wins decision to pull this app was
foolish and some of you might think you
would happily accept days upon days of
media criticism if it meant you were
making $50,000 every 24 hours with that
said everyone's different and people
value their personal life and personal
space and privacy to varying degrees
when definitely valued his privacy and
simple life highly so I can at least
understand why he felt giving up his
gold mine was worth it if it meant his
life went back to a state of normalcy
whether you agreed with his decision or
not flappy bird in its original form is
gone forever and there's no sign of it
ever returning the end of flappy bird
wouldn't be the end of dong wins career
in mobile game development he continues
to make games to this day and has had
some successful titles along the way
such as his 2014 creation swing copters
and swing copters - in 2015
his projects nowadays get nowhere near
the attention is flappy bird and I would
imagine this is out when would prefer
things to be in conclusion I find it
remarkable how this silly mobile game
has created such a legacy for itself
over the years while there were flappy
bird haters out there there was a
genuine fan base for this game hardcore
flappy bird lovers that hated to see the
game go the love for this game can be
seen in the countless ripoffs that
exists on App Store's as people try to
recreate the original version or throw
some sort of palette or theme swap over
it it's a bittersweet story where a
hopeful game developer achieves what
seems like a dream come true but it
turns out to be a living nightmare for
him and almost a I created a monster
type scenario and in the case of dongwan
he was willing to slay that beast if it
meant he could have his life back again
but that my friends is pretty much the
whole story of flappy bird and its
creator Dong Nguyen let me know what you
thought about this video in the comment
section and let me know who or what you
want me to talk about next major shout
outs to my patrons wavy web surf out
peace
[Music]